Welcome to the final
lesson of module one.
We'll finish off
the module by
discussing an
important connection,
that will help to provide
further intuition
for the method of
least squares.
Specifically, by
the end of this lesson,
you'll be able to
state the connection
between the method
of least squares
and maximum
likelihood estimation
with Gaussian
random variables.
Let's begin by recalling
the least squares
criterion from
the very first video
in this module.
We found the
best estimates
of some unknown,
but constant parameters by
determining
the values that
minimize the sum of
squared errors based
on our measurements.
But we can ask, why
squared errors?
Why not cubed errors,
or square root errors,
or something else?
This is actually
a particularly
deep question and there is
a whole field of
robust statistics
dedicated to it.
You can indeed use
different error functions,
but we'll go over
two reasons why
squared errors are
attractive and relevant.
The first is simple.
Squared errors allow
us to solve for
the optimal
parameters with
relatively
straightforward algebra.
If the measurement
model is linear,
minimizing the squared
error criterion
amounts to
solving a linear
system of equations.
The second reason
has to do with
probability and
a deep connection between
least squares and
maximum likelihood
estimators
under the assumption
of Gaussian noise.
As you may have guessed,
this connection
was first derived
in a particular
form by Gauss.
So, it's no surprise
that it involves
Gaussian random
variables or
equivalently
Gaussian noise.
To understand this
fundamental connection,
let's first discuss
maximum likelihood.
Instead of writing
down a loss,
we can approach
the problem of
optimal parameter
estimation by asking,
which parameters make
our recorded measurements
the most likely?
To keep things simple,
we'll stick to
a single scalar parameter
to build our intuition.
For example, let's look
again at measuring
resistance.
Given what we know
about probability,
if we have
four possible values
for this unknown
resistance parameter,
capital X, small x sub A
through small x sub D,
and each gives rise to
the following
conditional probability
on our measurement Y,
which value would maximize
the conditional
likelihood given
the measurement Y sub mes?
That's right. X sub A.
The highest
probability density at
the measured location is
given by the green curve,
which means
that X sub A is
our most likely parameter
value given
this measurement.
Now, if we take
our simple
measurement model,
we can convert it to
a probability density by
assuming a density for
our additive noise.
The unknown parameter, X,
becomes the mean
of this density
and the variance is simply
our noise variance.
Recall that the
probability density of
a Gaussian
random variable is
given by the
following equation.
This means that
we can express
our measurement
likelihood for
a single measurement
as follows.
If we have multiple
independent measurements,
each with the same
noise variance,
we can simply
take the product
of multiple Gaussians,
which results in
another Gaussian.
We can try to maximize
this likelihood with
respect to the mean
parameter X half.
To do this, we'll use
a technique that's
often used in
optimization.
Instead of maximizing
the likelihood directly,
we'll take it's logarithm
and maximize that.
Since the likelihood will
always be a
positive number and
because the logarithm is
a monotonically
increasing function,
this will not affect
the final result,
which is very convenient.
Once we apply
the logarithm to
this likelihood,
we see that something
pops out that
looks a lot like the sum
of squared errors.
The constant C in
this expression
refers to terms that are
not a function of X and
ones which we can
safely ignore.
The last step is now to
realize that the arg max
of the function
F is the same as
the arg min of the
negative of that function.
Using this fact,
we can turn
our likelihood
maximization into
a minimization of
the sum of squared errors.
For that,
minimizing the sum
of squared errors is
equivalent to maximizing
the likelihood
of a set of measurements,
assuming that
the measurements
are corrupted by additive,
independent,
Gaussian noise
that's of equal variance.
Furthermore, if we
maintain the same
assumptions,
but change the variance of
the Gaussian noise
for each measurement,
we can arrive at
the same criterion as
we saw in our weighted
least squares video.
So, in both cases,
the maximum
likelihood estimate,
given additive
Gaussian noise,
is equivalent to
the least squares or
weighted least
squares solutions
we derived earlier.
So, why is this result
so important?
Our self-driving car will
have to deal with many,
many sources of error.
Some of which are very
difficult to model.
However, the central
limit theorem,
tells us that when
combining all of
these errors together,
they can reasonably
be modeled by
a single Gaussian
error distribution.
We would like to
model our system
probabilistically
and yet maintain
simplicity
in calculations.
If our errors
are Gaussian,
then the best maximum
likelihood estimate
of the parameters
of interest,
is exactly the least
squares solution
we're already
familiar with.
Easy. To finish off,
let's discuss
one important
caveat for this method.
When we use the method
of least squares,
measurement
outliers can have
a significant effect
on our final estimate.
To understand why,
consider that under
a Gaussian distribution,
a sample that
is two standard
deviations away
from the mean,
has less than a five
percent probability
of occurring.
As a result, if there are
some outliers in
our measurement data,
the method of
maximum likelihood,
and equivalently,
the method of
least squares,
will put significant
importance
on these measurements.
So, the estimated value of
our parameter
will be pulled
strongly by
these outliers.
Our optimal method
will be skewed
so that the outlying
measurement
is more likely.
This can happen to
many estimators
using sensor data from a
self-driving vehicle.
Outliers might
result from people
walking in the middle
of a Lidar scan,
for example, or from
a bad GPS signal.
Consider our
resistor example.
With one outlying
measurement
that may come from
a simple accident,
the final estimate is
pulled significantly
away from that of
the outlier free case.
We always want to be
cognizant of
outliers and try
to quantify
the error distribution
whenever possible,
before blindly applying
maximum likelihood
or least squares.
Now,
that we've derived
this connection between
maximum likelihood
and least squares,
we're ready to extend
our recursive
least squares
estimator to
the full common filter,
one of the most
famous algorithms
of the 20th century.
To summarize,
we've learned that
the method of
least squares and
weighted least squares
produce the same
estimates as
maximum likelihood,
given Gaussian noise.
This is particularly
important because
many complex
noise sources,
when added, will tend
towards a Gaussian.
However,
it's always important
to be wary of
outlier measurements
that can
significantly affect
our final estimate values.
In the next module,
we'll take a look
at how we can
now extend what
we've learned
about least squares and
parameter estimation
to continually
varying states,
that may have more
complex nonlinear models
associated with
them. See you there.